# 2. Variables

**Shared TypeScript and JavaScript Data Types:**

1. <mark style="color:blue;">`number`</mark>: This is used for numeric values. Unlike some other languages, there's no separate data type for integers and floating point numbers in TypeScript and JavaScript.
2. <mark style="color:blue;">`string`</mark>: This is used for textual data.
3. <mark style="color:blue;">`boolean`</mark>: This is used for true/false values.
4. <mark style="color:blue;">`object`</mark>: This is used for complex data structures. In TypeScript, you can define the shape of your objects more specifically using interfaces or types.
5. <mark style="color:blue;">`array`</mark>: This is used for ordered lists of values. In TypeScript, you can define the types of values that are allowed in the array.
6. <mark style="color:blue;">`null`</mark>: A special keyword denoting a null value.
7. <mark style="color:blue;">`undefined`</mark>: A type that means a variable has not been assigned a value.

**Additional TypeScript Data Types:**

1. <mark style="color:yellow;">`any`</mark>: This is a powerful data type that allows a variable to be of any type. It's a way of opting out of type-checking for a variable.
2. <mark style="color:yellow;">`unknown`</mark>: This is a type-safe counterpart of `any`. A variable of type `unknown` can't be used for arbitrary operations without being checked.
3. <mark style="color:yellow;">`void`</mark>: This is used for function return types to signify that a function does not return a value.
4. `never`: This is used for function return types where the function always throws an error, or has an infinite loop.
5. <mark style="color:yellow;">`tuple`</mark>: This is used for arrays where the type of a fixed number of elements is known but does not have to be the same. For example, you could have a tuple where the first element is a string and the second is a number.
6. <mark style="color:yellow;">`enum`</mark>: This is used to define a set of named constants, either numeric or string.
7. <mark style="color:yellow;">`bigint`</mark>: This is a numeric data type that can hold big integers.



```typescript
let value: any;
value.foo.bar;    // This is allowed, even though it will cause a runtime error if value.foo is undefined.

let safeValue: unknown;
safeValue.foo.bar;    // This is not allowed, TypeScript will give a compile error.
```

### Define Variable

In TypeScript, you can define a variable using the `var`, `let`, or `const` keywords, similar to modern JavaScript. However, TypeScript also allows you to specify the type of the variable.

Here's the basic syntax for defining a variable in TypeScript:

```typescript
let variableName: type = value;
```

* `let`: This keyword is used to declare a block-scoped variable.
* `variableName`: This is the name of the variable that you're declaring.
* `type`: This is the type of the variable. This could be `number`, `string`, `boolean`, etc.
* `value`: This is the initial value of the variable.

Here are some examples:

```typescript
let name: string = 'John Doe';
let age: number = 30;
let isStudent: boolean = false;
```

You can also define a variable without initially assigning a value:

```typescript
let name: string;
let age: number;
let isStudent: boolean;
```

In these cases, `name` will be `undefined` until you assign a string value to it, `age` will be `undefined` until you assign a number value to it, and `isStudent` will be `undefined` until you assign a boolean value to it.

Also, TypeScript has type inference, so if you assign a value to the variable when you declare it, TypeScript will infer its type:

```typescript
let name = 'John Doe';  // TypeScript infers that name is a string
let age = 30;  // TypeScript infers that age is a number
let isStudent = false;  // TypeScript infers that isStudent is a boolean
```

In these cases, you don't need to explicitly specify the type, because TypeScript can infer it from the initial value. But you can still get the benefits of type checking, because TypeScript will ensure that you don't assign a value of the wrong type to these variables later.
