# 3. Loops



### For loops

#### Arrays

An array in TypeScript works much like an array in JavaScript. It's a data structure that can hold more than one value at a time. Each value (or element) in an array has a numeric position, starting from 0 - known as its index. You can store elements of any type in an array, and in TypeScript, you can specify the types of the elements.

Here's how you define an array in TypeScript:

```typescript
let array: number[] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
```

In the above example, `array` is an array of numbers. The type of the array is denoted by `number[]`. This means that this array can only hold numbers.

#### For Loops

A `for` loop is a control flow statement that allows code to be executed repeatedly. A `for` loop has three parts: initialization, condition, and final-expression.

Here's what a `for` loop looks like:

```typescript
for (let i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
    console.log(i); // Will log numbers 0 through 4
}
```

In the above `for` loop:

* Initialization: `let i = 0` is executed once before the execution of the code block.
* Condition: `i < 5` defines the condition for executing the code block.
* Final-expression: `i++` is executed (every time) after the code block has been executed.

#### Using a For Loop with an Array

You can use a `for` loop to iterate over the elements of an array.

Here's an example:

```typescript
let array: number[] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

for (let i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
    console.log(array[i]); // Will log numbers 1 through 5
}
```

In the above example, the `for` loop iterates over the `array` by index. On each iteration, it logs the current element of the array.

#### Other Types of For Loops

TypeScript (and JavaScript) also has two other types of for loops that are specially designed for arrays and objects: `for...of` and `for...in`.

The `for...of` statement creates a loop that iterates over iterable objects (including Array, Map, Set, String, TypedArray, and arguments object).

Here's an example of a `for...of` loop:

```typescript
let array: number[] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

for (let value of array) {
    console.log(value); // Will log numbers 1 through 5
}
```

In the above example, the `for...of` loop iterates over the values of the `array`. On each iteration, it logs the current value.

The `for...in` statement iterates over all enumerable properties of an object, in an arbitrary order.

Here's an example of a `for...in` loop:

```typescript
let obj = {a: 1, b: 2, c: 3};

for (let property in obj) {
    console.log(`${property}: ${obj[property]}`); // Will log "a: 1", "b: 2", "c: 3"
}
```

In the above example, the `for...in` loop iterates over the properties of the `obj` object. On each iteration, it logs the current property and its value.



### While Loops

TypeScript supports `while` and `do-while` loops, just like JavaScript.

#### While Loop

A `while` loop executes its statements as long as a specified condition evaluates to `true`. Here's the syntax of a `while` loop:

```typescript
while (condition) {
    // code to be executed
}
```

Here's an example:

```typescript
let i = 0;

while (i < 5) {
    console.log(i);
    i++;
}
```

In this example, the `while` loop will continue to print the value of `i` and increment it as long as `i` is less than 5.

#### Do-While Loop

A `do-while` loop is similar to a `while` loop, except that it tests the condition after executing the statements within the loop, guaranteeing that the loop will execute at least once. Here's the syntax of a `do-while` loop:

```typescript
do {
    // code to be executed
} while (condition);
```

Here's an example:

```typescript
let i = 0;

do {
    console.log(i);
    i++;
} while (i < 5);
```

In this example, the `do-while` loop will also continue to print the value of `i` and increment it as long as `i` is less than 5. However, if `i` is not less than 5 at the start, the loop will still execute once because the condition check happens after the execution of the loop's body.
